---
layout: post
title: NGC 4755, The Jewel Box Cluster
date: 2019-03-15 00:00:00
description: NGC 4755, or the Jewel Box Cluster, is an open cluster of stars visible only in the southern hemisphere in the constellation Crux, ‘The Southern Cross’. It is a beauty to observe and many are fascinated by its striking resemblance to its name.
thumbnail: assets/img/2019-03-15-ngc4755-jewelbox/01_jewel_box_by_eso_vlt.jpg
tags: 
categories: astronomy-space
featured: false
---

NGC 4755, or the Jewel Box Cluster, is an open cluster of stars visible only in the southern hemisphere in the constellation Crux, ‘The Southern Cross’. It is a beauty to observe and many are fascinated by its striking resemblance to its name.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/2019-03-15-ngc4755-jewelbox/01_jewel_box_by_eso_vlt.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    NGC 4755, or the Jewel Box Cluster. Image taken by the European Southern Observatory (ESO)’s Very Large Telescope (VLT). Image source: ESO.
</div>

An open cluster of stars is essentially a group of loosely-bound stars which were formed from the same nebula, and are weakly attracted to each other gravitationally. Open clusters generally have around one thousand stars, which are all roughly the same age, and these clusters are a few hundred million years old.

From Earth, they appear stunning and are very satisfying to look at. The Jewel Box cluster in particular is often referred to as a ‘southern gem’ due to the brilliant colours of the stars in the cluster. It is approximately 14 million years old and contains many different types of stars, such as variable pulsating stars, and supergiant stars.

The Jewel Box, as mentioned earlier, is located in the constellation of Crux, which is a circumpolar constellation and therefore is visible all year. However, the best time to observe Crux and the Jewel Box is around May/June, which is when it reaches the highest position in the sky. The Jewel Box cluster can be located slightly above the star Beta Crucis in Crux. Right next to the Jewel Box is the cloud of gas, the Coalsack Nebula, which is an interstellar gas cloud obscuring the light behind it.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/2019-03-15-ngc4755-jewelbox/02_crux_labelled.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    The Crux constellation, with the Beta Crucis star and the approximate location of the Jewel Box labelled. Image source: Wikimedia Commons.
</div>

One of my best experiences viewing the Jewel Box is when I visited the University of Canterbury’s Mount John Observatory recently, and got to look at the Jewel Box through the gigantic 1.0m telescope. It was a fantastic experience, and I saw so much detail!

I am always charmed by the elegance of the Jewel Box cluster, as it is one of my favourite Southern sky objects. Its visibility to the naked eye adds to the allure, so grab your binoculars or head out to your local observatory to marvel at this wonderful nightsky object!

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/2019-03-15-ngc4755-jewelbox/03_crux_deep_field.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    A deep-field image of the constellation Crux. Image source: Wikimedia Commons.
</div>