---
layout: post
title: Comet 46P/Wirtanen
date: 2019-02-07 00:00:00
description: Recently this comet, also known as the ‘Christmas Comet’, paid another visit for Earthlings to glimpse this very bright object in the northern skies.
thumbnail: assets/img/2019-02-07-comet46p/comet.46p_wirtanen_1024.jpg
tags: 
categories: astronomy-space
featured: false
---

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/2019-02-07-comet46p/comet.46p_wirtanen_1024.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    The comet 46P on December 7 2018 at Frosty Drew Observatory (RI, USA). Photo credit: Scott MacNeill.
</div>

Recently this comet, also known as the ‘Christmas Comet’, paid another visit for Earthlings to glimpse this very bright object in the northern skies. The best time to observe this comet was around mid-December when it was positioned between Aldebaran in Taurus, and the Pleiades open cluster. Starting in the first week of December 2018, due to its position being pretty high up, it was quite easily visible and the brightest in the near past and future years.

Comet 46P is named after Carl Wirtanen who discovered this comet in 1948. Its elliptical orbital period is estimated to be about 5.4 years, and is sized fairly small at about 1.2 kilometers.

I was fortunate to observe this comet through the naked eye, and through a telescope at the Frosty Drew Observatory in Providence [RI]. Frosty Drew is situated at the edge of a national protected wildlife refuge. To the South of the observatory there is nothing but wildlife and open waters. Due to its unique position, the South-East and South-West skies are the least light polluted and provide a great observation window year round. Boston is to the North of the observatory, and therefore the Northern and Eastern skies are always glowing with city light.

Fortunately for me, the weather was great around mid-December with no moon and no clouds. The Director of the observatory, Scott, had a great opportunity to capture endless pictures of 46P. It was very inspiring to watch this Christmas Comet, and I eagerly await the next time I can see it!